

===== PDF PAGE 1 =====
A2DEPT: Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via
Evolutionary Program Trees
Bin Chen * 1 Shouliang Zhu * 1 Beidan Liu 2 Yong Zhao2 Tianle Pu 2 Huichun Li 3 Zhengqiu Zhu † 2
Abstract
Designing heuristics for combinatorial optimiza-
tion problems (COPs) is a fundamental yet chal-
lenging task that traditionally requires extensive
domain expertise. Recently, Large Language
Model (LLM)-based Automated Heuristic De-
sign (AHD) has shown promise in autonomously
generating heuristic components with minimal
human intervention. However, most existing
LLM-based AHD methods enforce fixed algo-
rithmic templates to ensure executability, which
confines the search to component-level tuning
and limits system-level algorithmic expressive-
ness. To enable open-ended solver synthesis be-
yond rigid templates, we propose Automated Al-
gorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
(A2DEPT), which treats LLMs as system-level al-
gorithm architects. A 2DEPT explores the vast
program space via a tree-structured evolution-
ary search withhybrid selectionandhierarchi-
cal operators, enabling iterative refinement of
complete algorithms. To make open-ended gen-
eration practical, we enforce executability with a
lightweight program-maintenance loop that per-
forms feedback-driven repair. In experiments,
A2DEPT consistently outperforms representative
LLM-based baselines on both standard and highly
constrained benchmarks. On the standard bench-
marks, it reduces the mean normalized optimality
gap by 9.8% relative to the strongest competing
AHD baseline.
*Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors. 1The Insti-
tute of Intelligent Computing, University of Electronic Science
and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 2College of
Systems Engineering, National University of Defense Technol-
ogy, Changsha 410073, China 3Academy of Military Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100071, China. Correspondence to: Shou-
liang Zhu <202522900324@std.uestc.edu.cn>, Zhengqiu Zhu
<zhuzhengqiu12@nudt.edu.cn>.
S1 + H 1 S2 + H 1 S2 + H 2
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
6.6Objective Value Ã
6.53
6.34 6.28
(a)
H (H; ¼) (H; ¼; ½)
5.0
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6.0
6.2
6.4
6.6 6.53
6.18
5.85
(b)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Non-executable Rate (%)2.6%
14.8%
25.0%
Figure 1.Pilot study on the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP).
It illustrates (i) framework dependence in template-bound AHD
and (ii) the executability challenge when scaling from heuristics to
full solver logic.(a) S1 is a step-by-step constructive framework,
and S2 adds backtracking. H 1 and H 2 are evolved under S1 and
S2.(b)We expand the evolution target from a scoring heuristic
H to (H, π) with backtracking policy π, and then to (H, π, ρ) by
adding a utilization mechanism ρ. The red dashed curve reports
the non-executable rate (generated programs that fail to run).
1. Introduction
Combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) (Desale et al.,
2015) are ubiquitous in real-world applications, ranging
from logistics planning (Bengio et al., 2021) and vehicle
routing (Braekers et al., 2016) to chip floorplanning (Mirho-
seini et al., 2021) and job scheduling (Chaudhry & Khan,
2016). Due to the combinatorial explosion of the search
space, these problems are typically NP-hard (Garey & John-
son, 1979), rendering exact solvers computationally infea-
sible for large-scale instances. Consequently, constructing
high-performance heuristics—which trade optimality for
computational efficiency—has become the typical approach
to obtain satisfactory solutions under limited time budgets
(Talbi, 2009). However, the traditional paradigm of man-
ual heuristic design faces a severe scalability bottleneck.
This process is inherently labor-intensive and highly de-
pendent on domain-specific human intuition (Burke et al.,
2013). Practitioners must often engage in a tedious trial-and-
error cycle to handcraft rules that capture problem structure.
Moreover, handcrafted heuristics can be sensitive to prob-
lem variants: strategies tuned for one setting may degrade
on others (Wolpert & Macready, 2002), requiring substantial
re-tuning or redesign.
To address these scalability limitations, Large Language
1
arXiv:2604.24043v1  [cs.AI]  27 Apr 2026


===== PDF PAGE 2 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
Models (LLMs) have recently enabled a paradigm shift to-
ward Automated Heuristic Design (AHD) (Romera-Paredes
et al., 2024). Acting as general-purpose heuristic generators,
LLMs can translate high-level intentions into executable
code (Ma et al., 2023). This makes it possible to automate
substantial parts of the heuristic-development pipeline—
from implementing candidate rules to iterating over variants
under a user-specified evaluation protocol—thereby reduc-
ing reliance on repeated manual re-engineering.
Recent studies have further integrated LLMs with Evolu-
tionary Computation (EC) to advance AHD. For instance,
FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) adopts an LLM-
as-mutation-operator paradigm to evolve priority functions.
Subsequent methods further improve generation quality:
EoH (Liu et al., 2024a) evolves natural-language thoughts
and code jointly, while ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024) leverages
reflective verbal gradients for self-improvement. Most re-
cently, MCTS-AHD (Zheng et al., 2025) introduces Monte
Carlo Tree Search to mitigate premature convergence and
better balance exploration and exploitation.
Despite these advances, a critical limitation persists: most
LLM-based AHD methods design key heuristic functions
within predefined solver frameworks. Advanced search
strategies are therefore applied only to optimize isolated
functional slots. As a result, performance becomes tightly
coupled to the chosen framework. Figure 1(a) illustrates
the bottleneck: heuristics evolved under one constructive
framework can fail to transfer under another, and the relative
advantage of structural choices can be problem-dependent.
Consequently, template-constrained AHD inherits a hidden
yet consequential design decision—selecting an appropriate
solver backbone—that is difficult to resolve a priori, and
can cap performance even when the heuristic component
itself is well optimized.
These limitations motivate a transition from template-bound
AHD to open-ended Automated Algorithm Design (AAD),
where the search target expands from heuristic components
to complete solver programs, as illustrated in Figure 2(a).
By enabling redesign of the full algorithmic workflow, AAD
unlocks a much richer design space, but it also amplifies
generation difficulty. As Figure 1(b) suggests, enlarging the
evolution target from a scoring heuristic to broader solver
control can improve objective values, yet it increases the
non-executable rate due to the growing complexity of free-
form code generation. This transition introduces three fun-
damental challenges. First,Executability Instability: com-
plete solvers involve long, interdependent code with fragile
interfaces and dependencies, making candidates prone to
compilation/runtime failures. Second,Search Space Explo-
sion: AAD must explore an effectively unbounded program
space where valid, high-performing algorithms are sparse.
Third,Credit Assignment Opacity: large coupled edits
change multiple behaviors at once, making it difficult to
attribute performance differences to specific modifications
and weakening search guidance.
In this paper, we proposeA 2DEPT(AutomatedAlgorithm
Design viaEvolutionaryProgramTrees), a framework for
open-ended AAD that evolves complete solver programs.
A2DEPT performs tree-structured program search with hy-
brid selection, combining SA-style parent–child acceptance
with Boltzmann sampling to preserve diverse trajectories. It
further evolves programs with hierarchical operators (micro-
tuning, macro-mutation, semantic crossover) under adaptive
scheduling. To keep open-ended evolution runnable, we
couple the search with a lightweight maintenance loop that
repairs missing dependencies via a dependency graph and
prunes unreachable code.
Our main contributions are concluded as follows:
• Problem framing.We identify the framework bottle-
neck of LLM-based AHD and motivate open-ended
AAD as program-space search over executable solvers.
• A2DEPT framework.We propose A 2DEPT, a tree-
structured evolutionary program search framework that
uses LLMs as program-level variation operators to
evolve complete solvers.
• Mechanisms for reliable long-horizon evolution.We
introduce (i) a program-maintenance loop for depen-
dency repair and executability enforcement, (ii) a tree-
structured hybrid selection scheme that preserves di-
verse trajectories under a fixed budget, and (iii) hier-
archical operators with adaptive scheduling to enable
localized edits and improved credit assignment.
• Empirical validation.We evaluate A 2DEPT on a
diverse suite of NP-hard combinatorial optimization
benchmarks (standard and high-constraint) and show
consistent gains over representative LLM-based AHD
baselines. On the standard benchmarks, A 2DEPT re-
duces the mean normalized optimality gap by9.8%rel-
ative to the strongest competing AHD baseline, where
each per-task gap is defined as the relative percentage
deviation from the optimum before averaging.
2. Background and Related Work
2.1. Heuristics for Combinatorial Optimization
Combinatorial optimization problems such as TSP
(Rosenkrantz et al., 1974) and Job Shop Scheduling (JSP)
(Jain & Meeran, 1999) are typically NP-hard, making exact
solvers impractical at scale. Heuristics therefore serve as the
workhorse in practice, broadly falling into (i)constructive
rules that build feasible solutions incrementally (Campbell
& Savelsbergh, 2004; Paessens, 1988) and (ii)improvement
2


===== PDF PAGE 3 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
methods that iteratively refine incumbents via local search
or metaheuristics (Dorigo et al., 2007; Katoch et al., 2021),
e.g., simulated annealing (Rutenbar, 2002) and tabu search
(Al-Sultan, 1995). However, hand-crafted heuristics are of-
ten brittle: they are tuned to specific instance distributions
and can degrade under shifting constraints or operating con-
ditions (Hooker, 1995).
2.2. Automated Heuristic Design
Automated Heuristic Design (Liu et al., 2024a), often stud-
ied under the hyper-heuristics paradigm, aims to automate
the construction of optimization heuristics. Early AHD
work was dominated by Genetic Programming (GP) (Lang-
don & Poli, 2013; Koza, 1994), which evolves heuristic
programs via crossover and mutation but can suffer from
instability (e.g., invalid programs and code bloat) (O’Neill
et al., 2010). More recently, LLMs have enabled seman-
tically informed program generation and editing for AHD
(Liu et al., 2025; van Stein & B ¨ack, 2024), exemplified
by FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), EoH (Liu
et al., 2024a), ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024), and tree-based vari-
ants such as MCTS-AHD (Zheng et al., 2025). However,
most LLM-based AHD methods remain template-bound:
they optimize a small set of heuristic components (e.g.,
scoring/priority functions) within predefined algorithmic
templates, while keeping the surrounding control flow and
solver logic fixed. This structural constraint limits their abil-
ity to discover system-level algorithmic innovations required
by complex optimization problems. A2DEPT performs se-
mantically informed edits over complete solver programs
with explicit executability checks, enabling system-level
redesign rather than component-level tuning.
2.3. LLMs for Program Synthesis and Optimization
Recent advances in LLMs have catalyzed progress in pro-
gram synthesis and code-level optimization (Xi et al., 2025;
Lu et al., 2023; Shypula et al., 2023; Liventsev et al., 2023).
A dominant paradigm integrates LLM-based generation
with evaluation-driven feedback (Yang et al., 2023): instead
of one-shot code synthesis, systems interleave generation
with execution, verification, or performance assessment to
iteratively refine programs (Wang et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2024). Such generation–evaluation loops have been ex-
plored across debugging (Chen et al., 2023), prompt opti-
mization (Zhou et al., 2022), reward design (Ma et al., 2023),
robotics (Lehman et al., 2023), and broader search/evolution-
based optimization settings. However, program-space
search remains challenging due to the fragility of code edits
and the sheer size of the search space (Chen, 2021; Austin
et al., 2021). In contrast to prior work that typically opti-
mizes programs for correctness or local efficiency under
fixed specifications/tests, A2DEPT targets open-ended algo-
rithmic performance and evolves complete solver logic via
benchmark-driven feedback.
3. Methodology
3.1. Workflow Overview
As illustrated in Figure 2, A2DEPT casts AAD as an evolu-
tionary search over a discrete program space. It maintains
a global search tree T (Zheng et al., 2025) ofexecutable
programs, where each node stores the program, its score,
and its generation metadata. Unlike population-based meth-
ods, T retains all evaluated programs, enabling structured
exploration and reuse of prior trajectories. Formally, each
node is defined as a tuple n= (P, S,h, ω) , where P is
an executable program, S is its score on D, h records the
parent/operator history, and ω stores local operator weights.
A2DEPT decomposes long-horizon solver synthesis into a
sequence of localized, verifiable program edits guided by
empirical feedback. As shown in Figure 2(b), it expands
afrontierin batches: each iteration selects asetof parent
nodes via hybrid selection and applies adaptively scheduled
operators to generate multiple independent offspring. To
prevent failures from propagating across these expansions,
the program-maintenance pipeline in Figure 2(c) repairs
broken dependencies and prunes unreachable code before
evaluation, and the scores are written back into T to guide
subsequent selection.
The workflow proceeds in two phases. First, an LLM-based
initialization produces a diverse set of executable root pro-
grams (see Appendix C.1). Then, A 2DEPT enters an it-
erative loop: it selects parent nodes, applies hierarchical
mutation and recombination to generate new code, repairs
broken dependencies via the program maintenance mech-
anism, evaluates feasible programs, and inserts them back
into T until the computational budget is exhausted. The spe-
cific mechanisms for selection, generation, and governance
are detailed in the following subsections.
Design rationale.The components of A 2DEPT are not an
interchangeable assembly; each is necessitated by the con-
sequences of the previous one, forming a self-reinforcing
loop tailored to open-ended AAD. Tree-structured search
with SA-style parent–child acceptance is a natural fit be-
cause AAD primarily requiresdescribing parent–child re-
finement relationsrather than maintaining population-level
dynamics; SA satisfies detailed balance and provides a well-
characterized exploration–exploitation trade-off. However,
SA’s rejection rate is inherently high in open-ended AAD,
since many children carry structural changes whose bene-
fits are not immediately reflected in the score; this shrinks
the parent frontier and motivates Boltzmann supplementary
sampling over T to recover temporarily underperforming
but structurally promising branches. The resulting diver-
3


===== PDF PAGE 4 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
Key heuristic function
LLM
Automated Heuristic Design
Fixed framework
LLM
Automated Algorithm Design
Entry point
Open-ended Space
Control flow
Helper functions
(a) Paradigm Shift (AHD to AAD)
Root
Initial 
nodes
Hybrid selection
Simulated
annealing
Boltzmann 
sampling
Frontier
Parent Set
nextP
Adaptive operator scheduling
Weight 
Depth 
Score  
 1
 2
1
Raw
Generation
Broken
Dependencies
（e.g. missing func_x())
Dependency
Analysis
Missing 
Dependency

Pruning
Unreachable
Function
Output Executable
Program
Iterative
Repair
LLM
Evaluation
on     
(b) The A2DEPT Framework (Main Workflow) (c) Program Maintenance Mechanism
Offspring
Figure 2.Overview of the A 2DEPT framework. (a)Paradigm shift from template-bound AHD, where the LLM fills heuristic slots
within a fixed solver framework, to open-ended AAD, where the LLM synthesizes complete solver programs.(b)A 2DEPT maintains
a global search tree and expands a frontier in a batched manner via hybrid selection and adaptive operator scheduling.(c)A program
maintenance pipeline enforces executability through dependency analysis, iterative repair, and pruning, yielding executable programs for
evaluation onD.
sity provides the stepping stones that macro-mutation needs
to achieve paradigm-level restructuring, whose free-form
code in turnnecessitatesthe dependency-repair loop to pre-
serve executability. Finally, evaluation feedback drives the
adaptive scheduler (Eq. 5–6), which learns which operator
granularity is productive at each node, shaping the next cy-
cle. The ablation in Table 4 confirms that removing any one
component breaks the loop and causes clear degradation on
at least one task.
3.2. Program Maintenance Mechanism
Algorithms in AAD are inherently complex, involving mul-
tiple interdependent functions, global variables, and library
calls. Evolving such systems as flat text sequences is fragile,
as a single syntax error or unresolved reference can inval-
idate the entireprogram. To address this issue, A 2DEPT
introduces a program maintenance mechanism that improves
executability during evolution.
3.2.1. STRUCTUREDPROGRAMREPRESENTATION
Instead of evolving raw text, A2DEPT represents each solver
as a function-level modular program.
Formally, a program is written as P= (C pre,F f uncs). The
Preface Cpre contains global imports/configurations (and
constants) and is kept fixed to stabilize the execution envi-
ronment. TheFunction Registry Ff uncs is a set of modular
functions, where each function f is represented by its signa-
ture and executable body.
To regulate evolution, A2DEPT applies a role-aware pars-
ing that partitions Ff uncs intoImmutable Definitions Fimm
andMutable Strategies Fmut. Operators act only on Fmut
(Section 3.4), which prevents accidental corruption of foun-
dational utilities in Fimm and makes micro-tuning edits
interface-preserving.
3.2.2. DEPENDENCYREPAIR ANDCLOSURE
Structural mutations may introduce missing dependencies
when generated code calls undefined functions. A2DEPT re-
solves this via an automated dependency-repair mechanism.
Given a program P , we build a directed call graph Gdep =
(V, E), where V is the set of function names appearing in
P and (u, v)∈E denotes that u calls v. Let Def(P) be
the set of function names defined in P , and let B denote
language built-ins. We identify unresolved symbols as
U={v∈V| ∃u∈V: (u, v)∈E∧v /∈(Def(P)∪B)}.
(1)
If U ̸=∅ , A2DEPT iteratively prompts the LLM to imple-
ment the missing functions using call-site context (signa-
tures and usage) until U=∅ , yielding a dependency-closed
program. The repair loop is guaranteed to terminate: it halts
either when all missing dependencies are resolved (U=∅ )
or when the global LLM call budget is exhausted. In the
latter case, the program that remains incomplete is assigned
a score of zero and does not block subsequent search itera-
4


===== PDF PAGE 5 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
tions (Algorithm 1, Lines 19–26 in Appendix B).
Finally, we perform reachability analysis from the program
entry function and prune functions that are unreachable,
preventing dead logic from accumulating over iterations.
3.3. Tree-Structured Hybrid Search Strategy
To enable efficient exploration of the vast and discrete AAD
space, A2DEPT maintains a global search treeT . At each it-
eration, the goal is to select a set of valid parent nodesPnext
from the current frontier to generate the next batch of can-
didate programs. Because T primarily serves as a memory
of parent–offspring transformation trajectories rather than a
rollout-intensive planning structure, we adopt a lightweight
hybrid rule: simulated-annealing acceptance explicitly re-
flects the parent–child refinement relation with minimal
overhead, and Boltzmann sampling over T supplements the
remaining budget to reach a fixed parent set size K while
avoiding greedy top-kcollapse.
3.3.1. SIMULATEDANNEALING-BASEDPRIMARY
SELECTION
The primary selection stage determines which nodes from
the most recent expansion of the search tree are selected for
further evolution. We employ a simulated annealing strategy
(Nourani & Andresen, 1998) based on the Metropolis crite-
rion to filter the current frontier. For each newly generated
node nc, its performance is compared against that of its
parent np to determine whether it should be retained for the
subsequent evolutionary cycle.
Assuming that the scoring functionS(n) is to be maximized,
the selection probabilityP select is defined as:
Pselect(nc, np) =
(
1ifS(n c)≥S(n p),
exp

S(nc)−S(np)
Tt

otherwise,
(2)
where Tt denotes the system temperature at iteration t.
Nodes accepted under this criterion are added to Pnext as
seeds for subsequent mutations.
Dynamic Re-annealing.To mitigate search stagnation,
A2DEPT monitors the global best solution P ∗. If P ∗ re-
mains unchanged for a predefined number of generations
Nstall, the temperature Tt is increased to restore exploration
capability (Ingber, 1989). The temperature update rule is
given by:
Tt+1 =
(
Tt + ∆Tif∆t stall ≥N stall,
αTt otherwise, (3)
where α∈(0,1) is a decay factor and ∆T denotes the
re-annealing increment. Upon triggering re-annealing, the
stagnation counter ∆tstall is reset to zero, allowing the stan-
dard temperature decay schedule to resume.
3.3.2. BOLTZMANN-BASEDSUPPLEMENTARY
SELECTION
Since the simulated annealing stage may reject many can-
didates, the resulting parent set may contain fewer than K
nodes (i.e., |Pnext|< K ). To maintain constant parallel
throughput, A2DEPT supplements the parent set by sam-
pling additional nodes from the global search treeT.
Specifically, K− |P next| nodes are selected according to
Boltzmann selection (Goldberg, 1990), where the probabil-
ity of choosing a noden i is defined as:
Psupp(ni) = exp ((S(ni)−S max)/Tt)P
nj ∈T exp ((S(nj)−S max)/Tt) ,(4)
with Smax denoting the maximum score observed in the
search history.
Unlike greedy strategies that exclusively favor top-
performing candidates, this probabilistic selection assigns
non-zero sampling probabilities to suboptimal nodes.
3.4. Hierarchical Operators with Adaptive Scheduling
A challenge in AAD is coarse-grained credit assignment:
when a program is modified, it is non-trivial to attribute
an observed performance change to specific structural ed-
its. To address this, A 2DEPT decomposes evolution into
hierarchical granularities and uses an adaptive scheduler to
dynamically allocate search resources.
3.4.1. HIERARCHICALOPERATORDEFINITION
We define a tiered operator set O={m 1, m2, e1} that
acts at three levels of program transformation:micro-level
refinement,macro-level workflow restructuring, andse-
mantic recombinationvia crossover.
Micro-tuning (m1):Applies localized edits to the mutable
strategy functions Fmut (Section 3.2), refining logic and
parameters while preserving interfaces.
Macro-mutation (m2):Rewrites the solver workflow by
reconstructing the entry-point function, allowing changes
to control flow and function signatures; newly introduced
dependencies are resolved by the maintenance loop.
Semantic crossover ( e1):Synthesizes a hybrid program
from two parents (na, nb) by integrating complementary
mechanisms from their code and performance feedback,
with missing components repaired automatically.
3.4.2. ADAPTIVESCHEDULINGLOGIC
Instead of using fixed operator probabilities, A2DEPT main-
tains a node-specific weight vector ωn = (ωm1 , ωm2) for
each node n. At node n, the probability of selecting a
mutation operator op∈ {m 1, m2} is given by a softmax
5


===== PDF PAGE 6 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
scheduler:
P(op|n) = exp(ωop/τ)P
k∈{m1,m2} exp(ωk/τ) ,(5)
where τ >0 is a temperature parameter regulating the
exploration-exploitation trade-off. The crossover operator
e1 is invoked conditionally and is therefore excluded from
the node-local scheduling distribution.
After generating a child node nchild from parent nparent using
operator op, A2DEPT computes a normalized performance
change ¯r=

S(nchild)−S(n parent)

/|S(nparent)|. The cor-
responding operator weight is then updated to reinforce
beneficial modifications:
ωt+1
op =
(
ωt
op + ¯rif¯r≥0,
ωt
op −λ|¯r|if¯r <0, (6)
where λ >0 penalizes unsuccessful mutations. The child
node nchild inherits the updated vector ωnchild ←ω t+1
nparent as a
warm startrather than a fixed preference: because the soft-
max scheduler (Eq. 5) with temperature τ always assigns
non-zero probability to both operators, an inappropriate
inherited bias (e.g., after a macro-mutation that substan-
tially alters program structure) is corrected by subsequent
feedback within a few iterations, as Eq. 6 penalizes the un-
derperforming operator and reinforces the productive one.
Overall, this feedback-driven scheduler adaptively shifts
search effort between micro-tuning and macro-mutation as
the search progresses.
3.4.3. DIVERSITY-AWAREPARTNERSELECTION
We select crossover partners by balancing performance and
trajectory diversity. For a primary parent na, we measure
diversity with the depth of the least common ancestor (LCA)
in the search tree: smaller D(LCA(na, nb)) indicates ear-
lier divergence. We samplen b with
Pcross(na, nb)∝ S(nm)−S min
Smax −S min

1− D(LCA(na, nb))
Dmax

,
(7)
where nm = arg max{S(na), S(nb)}, D(·) is node depth,
andD max is the current maximum depth.
4. Experiments
In this section, we evaluate A 2DEPT on six combinato-
rial optimization problems, reporting solution quality on
standard benchmarks, robustness across alternative design
paradigms, and feasibility under stringent constraints; we
further conduct ablation studies, parameter sensitivity anal-
yses and a case study. Additional analyses are deferred to
Appendix E, including robustness to the LLM backbone
(Appendix E.1), comparison with LLM-as-Optimizer (Ap-
pendix E.2), convergence behavior at different search bud-
gets (Appendix E.3), LLM scaling and equalized token-
budget studies (Appendix E.4), hyperparameter sensitiv-
ity (Appendix E.5), wall-clock budget sensitivity (Ap-
pendix E.6), the source of the GLS advantage on FJSP
(Appendix E.7), out-of-distribution generalization (Ap-
pendix E.8), and resource consumption (Appendix E.9).
Benchmarks.We evaluate A 2DEPT on a diverse set of
NP-hard CO problems. For standard performance evalu-
ation, we consider four representative benchmarks from
FrontierCO (Feng et al., 2025): Maximum Independent Set
(MIS), Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem (CVRP), Ca-
pacitated Facility Location Problem (CFLP), and Flexible
Job-Shop Scheduling Problem (FJSP). To further assess
robustness in highly constrained settings, we additionally
include the Capacitated Electric Vehicle Routing Problem
with Time Windows (CEVRPTW) and the Multi-Mode Re-
source Constrained Project Scheduling Problem (MRCPSP).
Detailed problem definitions are provided in Appendix A.4.
Baselines.We compare A 2DEPT against three categories
of baselines. (1) classical solvers: We include the com-
mercial solver Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2025)
as a reference for optimal or near-optimal solutions, to-
gether with a classical heuristic baseline based on Iterated
Local Search (ILS) (Louren c ¸o et al., 2003). (2) learning-
based methods: We evaluate representative neural solvers
tailored to each problem, including SDDS (Sanokowski
et al., 2025) for MIS, DeepACO (Ye et al., 2023) for CVRP,
GCNN (Gasse et al., 2019) for CFLP, and MPGN (Lei et al.,
2022) for FJSP. (3) LLM-based AHD methods: We compare
against recent LLM-driven heuristic design frameworks,
namely FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), EoH (Liu
et al., 2024a), ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024), and MCTS-AHD
(Zheng et al., 2025). For standard benchmarks and high-
constraint evaluations, we use a unified step-by-step con-
structive framework (Asani et al., 2023), which incremen-
tally builds feasible solutions with minimal domain-specific
engineering and thus emphasizes the LLM’s heuristic design
capability. For the generalization study (Section 4.1.2), we
instead evaluate under the Guided Local Search(GLS) and
AAD paradigms. A detailed description on these general
frameworks is provided in Appendix A.
Settings.A 2DEPT is implemented in Python and exe-
cuted on a personal computer equipped with an Intel Core
Ultra 9 285K CPU and 96 GB of system memory. For all
LLM-based methods, we fix the search budget to N=500
LLM calls. Baseline methods are configured following the
hyperparameters reported in their original papers. For fair-
ness, each generated solver program is given a wall-clock
time limit of 120 seconds to solve the entire evaluation
dataset Deval (Appendix D.2). We run each method three
6


===== PDF PAGE 7 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
times on standard benchmarks and twenty times on high-
constraint benchmarks, reporting averaged results (and stan-
dard deviation when applicable). Within A2DEPT, we set
the parent budget to K=5 per expansion step. Simulated an-
nealing is initialized with T0=1.0 and decay factor α=0.95,
with re-annealing triggered after Nstall=3 consecutive gener-
ations without improvement using increment ∆T=0.2 . We
synchronize the scheduler temperature τt with the annealing
temperatureT t and set the penalty coefficient toλ=0.8.
4.1. Main Results
4.1.1. EXPERIMENTS ONSTANDARDBENCHMARKS
As shown in Table 1, A2DEPT outperforms all LLM-based
AHD baselines on every benchmark under both DeepSeek
and Gemini, under the same step-by-step constructive tem-
plate. Beyond winning on all tasks, A 2DEPT delivers
sizable and consistent gap reductions relative to the best
competing AHD method (for instance, from 17.42% to
8.79% on CVRP and from 11.35% to 4.20% on MIS un-
der DeepSeek), indicating that solver-level edits translate
into robust quality gains. Averaging the per-task normal-
ized Gap(%) values in Table 1 (each already expressed as
a percentage deviation from the optimum, so cross-task av-
eraging is on a common scale), A2DEPT reduces the mean
gap by 9.8% relative to the best competing AHD method
under DeepSeek. On CVRP and FJSP, the gains are smaller,
indicating that domain-specific inductive biases and mature
hand-engineered operators narrow the headroom available
to generic program-space evolution. Notably, A2DEPT is
competitive with strong non-LLM references: it matches
Gurobi on MIS while remaining clearly better than all LLM
baselines, whereas on CVRP the specialized neural method
remains ahead, highlighting that learned priors can still dom-
inate when problem structure is well captured by training.
Overall, the table shows that A2DEPT consistently converts
open-ended program exploration into measurable quality
gains, with the largest benefits arising in domains where
solver-level redesign matters most.
4.1.2. GENERALIZATIONACROSSDESIGN
FRAMEWORKS
To ensure that the observed AAD–AHD gap is not specific
to the step-by-step constructive template, we additionally
evaluate the AHD baselines under GLS framework, where
the LLM designs knowledge-based guidance matrices while
the local-search operators are fixed (Appendix A.3). We
also evaluate EoH and ReEvo in AAD.
As shown in Table 2, FJSP is an outlier where GLS outper-
forms all AAD-style methods when provided with expert-
designed neighborhood operators, suggesting that a local-
search inductive bias can dominate benefits of open-ended
solver synthesis. This also suggests AHD can be competi-
tive when the framework supplies suitable operator set and
the LLM only needs to learn effective guidance. To pinpoint
the source of the GLS advantage on FJSP, we additionally
compare the LLM-designed guidance matrix against a ran-
dom one under the same fixed operators (Appendix 14):
the random matrix loses only a modest amount on FJSP but
causes a sharp drop on CFLP. This contrast indicates that the
FJSP advantage stems largely from the strong inductive bias
of expert-designed neighborhood operators rather than from
LLM-designed knowledge, making template-bound AHD
and open-ended AADcomplementaryrather than strictly
ordered. In contrast, A2DEPT targets a more general setting
that evolves solver logic directly in program space with-
out domain-specific operators, and it remains consistently
strong on CFLP, CVRP, and MIS. Meanwhile, simply mov-
ing EoH and ReEvo from AHD to AAD does not close
the gap to A2DEPT, suggesting that extra freedom must be
paired with mechanisms that preserve long-range logical
consistency to be useful.
4.1.3. EXPERIMENTS ONHIGH-CONSTRAINTCO
High-constraint combinatorial optimization problems
present significant challenges due to fragmented search
spaces and stringent validation requirements, making the
identification of feasible solutions particularly difficult. To
evaluate A2DEPT’s capacity to address these challenges,
we conduct experiments on two representative problems:
CEVRPTW and MRCPSP. For CEVRPTW, we use the ES-
OGU benchmark (Aslan et al., 2025). For MRCPSP, we use
instances from the PSPLIB library (Sprecher & Kolisch,
1996). Detailed dataset information is provided in Ap-
pendix D.1. We report two metrics: the Infeasibility Rate
(IR), which measures the percentage of test instances where
the algorithm fails to generate a valid solution, and the Rel-
ative Gap, which quantifies the deviation from the best solu-
tion achieved across all successful runs. The results in Table
3 highlight A2DEPT’s performance in high-constraint envi-
ronments. On the CEVRPTW task, A2DEPT achieves the
lowest IR and the best performancein terms of optimality
gap. For the MRCPSP problem, A2DEPT outperforms all
other methods in terms of solution feasibility. While no
method achieves a valid solution for all instances due to the
problem’s complexity, A2DEPT demonstrates robustness
with asubstantially lower IR.
4.2. Ablation Studies
To validate the necessity of A 2DEPT’s components, we
construct several ablated variants by disabling one mech-
anism from the full pipeline, with all other settings fixed.
Part A of Table 4 shows that each ablation degrades per-
formance on at least one task relative to full A 2DEPT. In
particular, disabling adaptive scheduling increases the gap
on both tasks, suggesting that feedback-driven allocation is
7


===== PDF PAGE 8 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
Table 1.Main Results on Standard Benchmarks.Comparison of A 2DEPT against baselines under different LLM backbones. Obj.
denotes the objective value (lower↓ or higher ↑ is better), and Gap reports the relative gap (%) to the Optimal solution. Standard deviations
are shown for Gap to emphasize robustness under repeated runs. For LLM-based methods, we additionally report the standard deviation
over independent runs. Bold: global best results among non-oracle methods; Shaded: best performance within each LLM group.
Method CFLP CVRP FJSP MIS
Obj. (105)↓ Gap (%) ± std ↓Obj. (10 5)↓ Gap (%) ± std ↓Obj. (10 4)↓ Gap (%) ± std ↓Obj. (10 3)↑ Gap (%) ± std ↓
Baselines
Optimal 6.01 – 0.99 – 1.25 – 2.86 –
ILS 8.36 39.04 1.18 19.48 1.50 19.78 2.31 19.11
Neural* 6.51 8.261.05 6.311.46 16.55 2.45 14.26
Gurobi6.01 0.001.06 6.751.34 7.222.74 4.28
LLM: DeepSeek v3.2 (Non-Think Mode)
FunSearch 7.34 22.13±3.03 1.23 24.13±9.59 1.60 27.82±3.98 2.35 17.89±2.93
EoH 7.12 18.48±4.73 1.16 17.42±1.55 1.60 28.08±1.62 2.54 11.35±6.18
ReEvo 7.01 16.56±6.55 1.20 18.04±4.65 1.60 28.24±2.71 2.44 14.70±3.78
MCTS-AHD 6.86 14.09±2.23 1.19 19.97±3.88 1.58 26.55±2.13 2.40 16.16±5.51
A2DEPT (Ours) 6.70 11.46±3.70 1.08 8.79±2.63 1.49 18.95±4.15 2.74 4.20±2.07
LLM: Gemini 2.5 Flash
FunSearch 7.45 23.94±1.69 1.24 25.13±3.96 1.62 29.31±5.15 2.37 17.12±6.28
EoH 7.08 17.82±8.04 1.14 14.72±0.79 1.62 29.45±3.72 2.39 16.47±4.27
ReEvo 6.98 16.15±6.75 1.20 17.47±1.38 1.62 29.21±4.09 2.40 16.15±0.83
MCTS-AHD 7.26 20.87±2.57 1.14 15.28±3.73 1.63 30.16±1.45 2.40 16.14±5.90
A2DEPT (Ours) 6.87 14.24±1.25 1.11 12.49±2.73 1.53 22.71±5.91 2.65 7.43±2.92
Note: “Neural*” denotes learning-based methods.
Table 2.Generalization across Paradigms.Comparison of op-
timality gaps (%) under different algorithm design frameworks
on standard benchmarks. Values are reported as mean gap ±
standard deviation. All LLM-based methods use DeepSeek v3.2
(Non-Think Mode). Lower is better ↓. Bold: best performance in
each column.
Method CFLP CVRP FJSP MIS
A 2 DEPT (Ours)11.46±3.70 8.79±2.6318.95±4.154.20±2.07
Framework: GLS
FunSearch 20.92±4.52 12.62±2.11 14.71±1.82 17.88±0.41
EoH 17.39±1.63 12.68±4.63 11.71±1.09 15.33±3.41
ReEvo 14.39±1.85 12.32±3.65 13.77±0.52 17.79±2.90
MCTS-AHD 15.87±3.55 12.09±2.8710.76±1.0610.49±1.74
Framework: AAD
EoH 16.51±8.27 10.38±3.19 17.47±4.66 8.31±3.99
ReEvo 13.79±6.23 9.72±4.65 19.67±7.73 7.85±2.51
important for balancing local refinement and structural ed-
its. Removing Boltzmann supplementation further degrades
performance, supporting the role of diversity-preserving
sampling from the global search tree. Replacing hybrid
SA+Boltzmann selection with uniform random parent se-
lection also worsens both benchmarks, confirming the im-
portance of performance-aware selection pressure. Finally,
constraining the method to a fixed-template AHD setting
yields the largest gaps, highlighting the benefit of open-
ended program-level solver evolution. We also analyze
Table 3.Results on High-Constraint Problems.Comparison of
IR and Optimality Gap. Gap is relative to the known optimum; “–”
indicates the optimum is unavailable. Bold: best result.
Method
CEVRPTW MRCPSP
Gap (%)↓IR (%)↓Gap (%)↓IR (%)↓
LLM: DeepSeek v3.2 (Non-Think Mode)
FunSearch 6.81 15.25 – 29.64
EoH 3.52 9.87 – 25.68
ReEvo 4.89 8.67 – 22.75
MCTS-AHD 3.75 8.79 – 24.85
A2DEPT (Ours)0.00 2.56–15.89
sensitivity to the parent set size k, which controls the batch
expansion budget. Part B of Table 4 shows that overly small
k limits diversity, whereas overly large k dilutes the fixed
sampling budget; overall, k=5 offers the best trade-off (ad-
ditional results are reported in Appendix E.5).
4.3. Case Study
We trace the evolutionary lineage of the best MIS solver to
illustrate how A2DEPT’s mechanisms interact (Appendix F).
A branch rejected by primary selection is recovered by Boltz-
mann supplementation, preserving a diverse stepping stone.
Along this branch, hierarchical operators enable a jump
from a constructive greedy heuristic to an ILS-style solver
8


===== PDF PAGE 37 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
it into the parent pool, preserving a pivotal evolutionary pathway that would otherwise have been pruned.
Phase 3: Macro-level Paradigm Shift (ID 70, Score 25.94).Using the retained lineage, Generation 4 (ID 70) exhibits a
massive structural jump. As illustrated in Figure 4(b), the LLM moves beyond constructive greedy logic and synthesizes
a complete ILS framework. This includes a kick move for perturbation, a multi-operator local search step, and
basin-hopping control logic. This transition confirms the ability of our hierarchical operators to perform non-local program
rewrites.
Phase 4: Efficiency Refinement (ID 318, Score 26.44).In later generations (e.g., Generation 24), the focus shifted to
fine-grained refinement. ID 318 introduced priority queues (Heaps) via heapq to support repeated ranking operations
efficiently (Figure 4(c)). Throughout this process, the Program Maintenance mechanism was critical in detecting and
repairing broken dependencies as the code grew into a complex multi-module system.
# ID 2: Simple Greedy Construction
defsolve_mis(adjacency_matrix, n_nodes):
candidate_nodes = np.arange(n_nodes)
while len(candidate_nodes) > 0:
next_node = select_next_node(...)# min-degree style rule
independent_set.append(next_node)
# ... remove neighbors ...
returnindependent_set
(a)Generation 1: Baseline Constructive Heuristic
# ID 70: Paradigm Shift to Iterated Local Search (ILS)
defsolve_mis(adjacency_matrix, n_nodes):
current_set = greedy_initial_solution(...)
foriterationin range(max_iterations):
ifno_improve_count >= max_no_improve:
current_set = kick_move(current_set, ...)# perturbation
new_set = local_search_step(current_set, ...)# add/swap/plateau
if len(new_set) >len(best_set):
best_set = new_set.copy()
return sorted(best_set)
(b)Generation 4: Structural Breakthrough Enabled by Hierarchical Operators
# ID 318: Heuristic Guidance + Data Structure Optimization
importheapq# efficiency: priority queue operations
deflocal_search_step(current_set, ...):
ifadd_candidates:
degrees = [np.sum(adj[node])fornodeinadd_candidates]
min_deg =min(degrees)
best = [nforn, din zip(add_candidates, degrees)ifd == min_deg]
node_to_add = random.choice(best)# heuristic-guided choice
current_set.add(node_to_add)
returncurrent_set
(c)Generation 24: Efficiency Refinement via Heaps and Heuristic Guidance
Figure 4.Evolutionary trajectory on MIS.The solver evolves from a constructive greedy heuristic (ID 2) to an ILS-based framework
(ID 70) through non-local structural edits, and later improves efficiency and decision quality (ID 318).
F.2. Case Study II: Failure Analysis and AAD Risks
To provide a comprehensive view of open-ended AAD, we analyze recurring failure modes observed on MIS. One prominent
failure mode isincomplete system-level refactoring: the LLM initiates a global change of data representation, but fails to
consistently enforce the new contract across modules. Unlike AHD, where data structures are typically fixed, A 2DEPT
allows the LLM to redefine the solver’s data representation. While this enables profound innovations (like the heap
optimization in Phase 4 of Appendix F.1), it also opens the door to catastrophic structural inconsistencies.
The Bitmask Refactoring Trap (IDs 158, 160).We analyzed a cluster of candidates that are marked as non-executable
due to runtime errors. In these instances, the LLM attempted a theoretically sound optimization: replacing standard Python
Set operations with bitmasking (using integers to represent sets of nodes) . The model correctly identified that bitwise
37


===== PDF PAGE 38 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
operations could offer O(1) complexity for set intersections on dense graphs and successfully implemented helper functions
likeset to bitmask.
The Failure Mechanism: Partial Migration.The crash occurred because the refactoring waspartial. As shown in
Figure 5, while the mutation operators allowed the LLM to rewrite the core search logic to use bitmasks, the cognitive
load of maintaining this new ”Bitmask Protocol” across all system modules proved too high. Notably, this is not a missing-
dependency issue: the program is syntactically complete, yet violates a cross-module data contract, which is harder to
recover from with dependency closure alone. Specifically, the LLM failed to enforce the new data contract in the perturbation
operator (kick move) and the final improvement phase, leading toType Mismatcheswhere bitmasks (integers) were
passed to functions expecting iterables (sets).
Insight.This failure mode highlights a key trade-off: to enable system-level discovery, AAD must tolerate the instability
arising from imperfect architectural migrations. It suggests that future work could benefit from static analysis tools or
”type-aware” prompt augmentation to help the LLM maintain global consistency during radical data structure changes.
# ID 158: Partial Refactoring Failure (Bitmask vs Set)
# 1. The LLM correctly implements bitmask helpers (Good Idea)
defset_to_bitmask(node_set, n_nodes):
mask = 0
fornodeinnode_set: mask |= 1 << node
returnmask
# 2. The Local Search is updated to use bitmasks (Complex Logic)
defimproved_local_search(current_set, ...):
# ... logic using bitwise OR/AND ...
current_mask = set_to_bitmask(current_set, n_nodes)
# LLM forgets to convert back to Set before returning!
returncurrent_mask# <--- Returns INT (Bitmask)
# 3. The Main Loop or Next Operator crashes (Type Mismatch)
defsolve_mis(adjacency_matrix, n_nodes):
# ...
# improved_local_search returns an INT, but current_set expects a SET
current_set = improved_local_search(current_set, ...)
# CRASH: kick_move expects a Set to calculate len(), but gets an Int
ifno_improve_count >= max_no_improve:
# TypeError: object of type ’int’ has no len()
current_set = improved_kick_move(current_set, ...)
Figure 5.Anatomy of a Failure (ID 158).The LLM attempts to optimize the solver by introducing bitmasks. However, the refactoring is
incomplete: improved local search returns a bitmask (int) instead of a set, causing a type error in the subsequent kick move
operator which expects a standard set. This illustrates the risk of ”Type Consistency” loss during open-ended architectural redesign.
G. Generalization to Continuous Optimization
To test whether A2DEPT generalizes beyond discrete combinatorial optimization, we further evaluate it on three continuous
domains: numerical ODE integration, root-finding, and feedback control. Together, these tasks assess whether the algorithm-
design logic learned in discrete search can transfer to continuous mathematical settings.
G.1. Discovery of Numerical ODE Solvers
To evaluate the capability of A2DEPT in discovering numerical algorithms for continuous dynamics, we designed a rigorous
benchmarking framework covering distinct numerical challenges.
Experimental Setup.The experiment dataset consists of four problem families commonly used in numerical ODE
benchmarking (Hairer et al., 1993): (1)Non-Stiff(Harmonic Oscillator), (2)Medium Non-Linear(Van der Pol Oscillator),
(3)Stiff(Robertson Kinetics), and (4)High-Dimensional(Discretized Heat Equation, N= 20 ). The evaluation metric is
defined as S=−log 10(Error)−λlog 10(Cost), which balances accuracy and computational effort (function evaluations).
Crucially, to rigorously test stability, we imposed a challenging fixed step size of∆t= 0.05 for all fixed-step solvers. This
step size is significantly larger than the stability limit of classical explicit methods for the Stiff and High-Dimensional
problems, thereby forcing the algorithm to discover implicit-like or highly stable mechanisms to ensure convergence. For
adaptive solvers, we set a high precision tolerance (rtol= 10 −5) to simulate industrial usage standards.
38


===== PDF PAGE 39 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
Table 17.ODE Solver Performance Comparison.Scores reflect −log 10(Error)−λlog 10(Cost). Higher is better. “-20” indicates
divergence. A2DEPT achieves state-of-the-art performance on Stiff and High-Dimensional problems, outperforming specialized solvers
like LSODA, though it struggles with medium non-linearity.
Problem Family Baselines Ours
Euler BwdEuler RK4 RK45 LSODA DOP853 A2DEPT
1. Non-Stiff (Harmonic) 0.08 0.145.704.10 3.86 4.78 4.60
2. Medium (Van der Pol) -0.57 -0.68 3.30 4.08 3.244.82 -1.03
3. Stiff (Robertson) -20.00 3.42 -20.00 3.21 4.73 1.75 5.56
4. High-Dim (Heat Eq) -3.45 1.20 -20.00 5.30 5.04 5.32 5.99
Baselines.We benchmarked the evolved solver against a comprehensive suite of classical numerical integrators, organized
into three distinct categories. First, we employed explicit fixed-step methods (Euler, RK4) (Hairer et al., 1993) to represent
standard low-order and high-order approaches, which are anticipated to fail in stiff regimes given the large time step (∆t).
Second, we included the implicit fixed-step method (Backward Euler) to benchmark stability; while inherently robust against
stiffness, this approach typically incurs high computational costs due to the necessity of iterative root-finding. Finally,
we compared against adaptive step-size methods (RK45, DOP853, LSODA) (Fehlberg, 1969; Dormand & Prince, 1980;
Hindmarsh, 1983), representing industrial solvers. Among these, LSODA serves as the strongest baseline for stiff problems
due to its capability to automatically switch between stiff (BDF) and non-stiff (Adams) integration schemes.
Results Analysis.Table 17 shows that A 2DEPT performs particularly well on stiff and high-dimensional problems, where
standard explicit solvers diverge under the large fixed step size. It even surpasses specialized industrial solvers such as
LSODA on the stiff benchmark, suggesting that the evolved method acquires unusually strong stability properties. On
medium nonlinear dynamics, however, A2DEPT underperforms adaptive methods, indicating that the current strategy lacks
sufficiently fine-grained error-control logic in regimes that alternate between stiff and non-stiff behavior.
G.2. Discovery of Numerical Root-Finding Algorithms
To evaluate A2DEPT’s capability in discovering optimization algorithms for continuous functions, we constructed a
comprehensive benchmark covering diverse root-finding challenges.
Experimental Setup.We generated a dataset consisting of 400 stochastic instances across four distinct problem families.
These includeSmooth Polynomialsrepresenting well-behaved differentiable functions,Ill-Conditioned Functionscharacter-
ized by multiple roots with vanishing derivatives ,Oscillatory Functionsfeaturing high non-linearity and local extrema, and
High-Dimensional Systems(N= 2) requiring vector-valued solutions. To comprehensively assess algorithmic quality, we
defined an efficiency-aware unified scoreS=I succ ·(1−αln(1 +N fev)−βln(1 +N iter))−(1−I succ)·γ , where Isucc
denotes the success indicator, and Nfev and Niter represent the number of function evaluations and iterations, respectively.
This metric explicitly rewards algorithms that converge successfully with minimal computational cost.
Baselines.We tested A 2DEPT against a wide spectrum of classical numerical solvers to ensure a rigorous comparison.
For univariate problems, the baseline suite includes robust bracketing methods such as Bisection and Brent (Brent, 2013),
which guarantee convergence given a valid interval; derivative-based methods like Newton-Raphson and Secant, which
exploit gradient information for rapid convergence (Press et al., 2007); and acceleration techniques such as Steffensen’s
method (Steffensen, 1933). For multivariate systems, we employ specialized quasi-Newton solvers, specifically Broyden’s
method (Broyden, 1965) and Anderson acceleration (Anderson, 1965), which are designed to handle coupled non-linear
equations without full Jacobian computation.
Results Analysis.The comparative results presented in Table 18 illustrate A 2DEPT’s versatile performance profile. On
well-behavedSmooth PolynomialsandOscillatoryfunctions, A 2DEPT effectively matches the theoretical optimality of
Newton-Raphson while significantly surpassing derivative-free methods, suggesting the rediscovery of gradient-exploitation
logic. In the challengingHigh-Dimensionalsetting, A 2DEPT demonstrates superior generalization, substantially outper-
forming standard multivariate solvers like Broyden and Anderson that struggle with coupled non-linearities. Although
A2DEPT falls short of specialized bracketing methods like Brent onIll-Conditionedproblems due to the lack of strict
39


===== PDF PAGE 40 =====
A2DEPT : Large Language Model–Driven Automated Algorithm Design via Evolutionary Program Trees
Table 18.Performance Comparison on Numerical Root-Finding Tasks.We report the average unified score (higher is better) over
400 stochastic instances. “–” indicates the method is not applicable to the problem dimension. A2DEPT achieves the best or near-best
performance across all categories, demonstrating superior generalization compared to specialized baselines.
Task Family Baselines Ours
Bisect. Brent Newton Secant Steff. Broyden And. A2DEPT
1. Smooth Poly. 0.36 0.500.640.59 0.40 – – 0.63
2. Ill-Cond. (Roots) 0.650.750.30 0.23 0.45 – – 0.51
3. Oscillatory -1.15 -1.200.660.59 0.64 – – 0.66
4. High-Dim (N= 2) – – – – – 0.38 0.38 0.60
Table 19.Long-Horizon Control Performance (T=5000).Average stability scores over 5 random seeds (higher is better). “Fail”
indicates divergence. The extended horizon highlights steady-state precision. A2DEPT achieves SOTA results across all tasks, notably
outperforming the expert-designed Energy Shaping on Pendulum and matching the theoretical optimal LQR on CartPole and Double
Integrator.
System Dynamics Baselines Ours
PID SMC Bang-Bang Energy Shaping LQR A2DEPT
1. Pendulum Swing-Up -1086.69 -1086.69 -1086.69 -8.48 -1086.69 -7.85
2. CartPole Stabilization -22299.76 -25683.72 -4881.07 – -0.09 -0.08
3. Double Integrator -2.18 -2.17 -7.74 –-2.12 -2.13
interval safeguards, it still robustly outperforms pure gradient-based methods that suffer from vanishing derivatives. In
essence, A2DEPT acts as a robust generalist, striking a favorable balance between the convergence speed of gradient
methods and the stability of heuristic approaches across diverse topological landscapes.
G.3. Discovery of Feedback Control Policies
To evaluate A2DEPT’s ability in discovering continuous feedback control laws, we constructed a benchmark consisting of
three classic control tasks with distinct dynamic properties.
Experimental Setup.The evaluation includes three physical systems: Pendulum Swing-Up ( ˚Astr¨om & Furuta, 2000)
(underactuated non-linear), CartPole Stabilization (Barto et al., 2012) (multivariable unstable), and Double Integrator (linear
canonical). All systems are simulated via RK4 integration (Press et al., 2007) with a time step of ∆t= 0.02s . Crucially, we
use an extended horizon of T= 5000 steps to evaluate long-horizon stability and steady-state accuracy. Performance is
measured by a composite cost that heavily penalizes divergence (Ifail), while also minimizing tracking error (MSE) and
control effect.
Baselines.We compare against a diverse set of representative strategies. For linear regimes, we include PID ( ˚Astr¨om
& H ¨agglund, 2006) as a standard model-free baseline and the Linear Quadratic Regulator (LQR) (Kreindler, 1963),
which is optimal control for linear systems under quadratic costs. To handle nonlinear dynamics, we consider switching
controllers including Sliding Mode Control (SMC) (Utkin, 2003) and Bang-Bang control; these methods use discontinuous
actions to enforce desired behavior but often induce chattering. Additionally, we incorporate an expert heuristic (Energy
Shaping)(Spong, 2002), a domain-specific controller explicitly designed to manage the global non-linearity inherent in the
Pendulum Swing-Up task.
Results Analysis.Table 19 summarizes the results. On Pendulum Swing-Up, where linear controllers typically fail,
A2DEPT succeeds and improves upon the energy-shaping heuristic, suggesting a more efficient swing-up strategy. On
CartPole and the Double Integrator, A 2DEPT performs comparably to the optimal LQR baseline, indicating that it can
recover near-optimal feedback behavior in linearizable settings. Moreover, relative to switching baselines that can be
destabilized by chattering, A 2DEPT tends to produce smooth control laws that remain stable over the long evaluation
horizon.
40